RFC - Efficient Search Components  (WIP) (#1656)
openbao/openbao: website/content/docs/rfcs/efficient-search-components.mdx

### Index Manager

The `IndexManager` is the construct that manages and allows manipulating the set of indexes bound to a backend. It will be added as an attribute to the backend and initialized in the `Initialize` function. The existing index identifiers are persisted in storage allowing re-initializing of the indexes after restarts/failures.

```go
type IndexManager struct {
	indices map[string]Index
	sync.RWMutex
	storage logical.Storage
	…
}

func NewIndexManager(...) (*IndexManager, error)

// Initialize loads into memory the existing indexes.
func (im *IndexManager) Initialize(ctx context.Context, storage bptree.Storage) error
// DeleteIndex marks an index for deletion, purging all data bound to it.
func (im *IndexManager) DeleteIndex(ctx context.Context, storage bptree.Storage, indexName string) error

> // GetIndex retrieves the index with the provide identifier

Reviewer: Seems like we might also want `ListIndex(...)` to clean up any trailing indices?

Author: Yes, we could also have something like that. This part hasn't been too flushed yet but some kind of list operations might be useful.
Going to add.

```go
type BPlusTree struct {
	config *BPlusTreeConfig // Tree configuration and metadata
	lock   sync.RWMutex     // Reader-writer mutex for thread safety
}
```

**Attributes:**

- `config`: Contains tree metadata including unique identifier, node capacity, and versioning information.
- `lock`: Ensures thread-safe concurrent access with optimized read performance through RWMutex. The implementation uses tree-level locking, which is simpler to implement and reason about but can become a bottleneck under high concurrent load.

#### Configuration Structure

The `BPlusTreeConfig` serves as both runtime configuration and persistent metadata stored alongside the tree data:

```go
type BPlusTreeConfig struct {
	TreeID  string `json:"tree_id"` // Unique identifier for multi-tree storage
	Order   int    `json:"order"`   // Maximum number of children per node (default: 32) (Can't be updated...)
	Version int    `json:"version"` // Configuration version for schema evolution
}
```

**Attributes:**

- `TreeID`: Unique identifier enabling multiple named trees within a single storage backend. Used to namespace storage paths as `<TreeID>/nodes/<nodeID>`, `<TreeID>/root`, and `<TreeID>/config`

> - `Order`: Defines the maximum number of children per internal node (minimum 3, default 32). This directly affects tree height and performance characteristics

Reviewer: I forget, `32` comes from bbolt or somewhere else?

This would require a CEL integration that would parse/execute these CEL programs and output the list of indices…
This approach doesn’t necessarily replace static indices.

**Not finished...**

### Querying Data Interface

A minimal JSON-based query language for HTTP request bodies that enables filtering over sets using simple search semantics. The format supports two operations: a basic search over a single key-value pair, and the intersection of multiple such searches. A simple query is expressed as:

```json
{
  "query": {
    "key": "...",
    "value": "..."
  }
}
```

`key` identifies the index and `value` the key being searched in the index.

To perform an intersection of multiple conditions, the following structure is used:

```json
{
  "op": "intersect",
  "queries": [
    { "key": "...", "value": "..." },
    { "key": "...", "value": "..." }
  ]
}
```

> Each query may optionally include a `match` or `prefix` field to control how values are compared. "exact" is the default and can be omitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each query may optionally include a `match` field to control how values are compared. "exact" is the default and can be omitted, else `prefix` can be used to signify that the value is a prefix of desired matches.
```

**Alternative Considered: Page-Based Storage**
A page-based storage system would allow multiple nodes to be associated with a single key, enabling more efficient storage and retrieval of data. This would require a more complex implementation but would provide better performance for large datasets. The current implementation uses a simple key-value store, which is sufficient for the initial use case but may need to be replaced in the future as the system scales.

## Downsides

Code complexity and additional load on the system and storage when building indexes. It is suggested to make index building opt-in and also tunable so that system administrators can disable index building for mounts if desired.

## Security Implications

No security implications were identified.

## User/Developer Experience

With these constructs available, an OpenBao developer will be able to dynamically configure and build indexes on the data persisted in storage.
No user facing changes are expected with this RFC as it only introduces the constructs to build the indexes.

## Unresolved Questions

> - How to keep track of the current progress of an index that is being incrementally built;

Reviewer: I think this would have to be in the plugin. They'd add an `indexed: <bool>` on the items themselves or an `indexed: <int>` for versioned items (with async re-indexing). Linear scan is going to be the only approach, +/- a queue system for handling async updates.

Author: Not sure if  I understood what you are proposing here. The idea is for the plugin to track the items indexed but wouldn't that be iterating over all items and check if they have already been indexed (by checking the label, tag)? I was thinking more along the lines of having a milestone but don't know how would that be feasible.

> - Purging or removing all nodes associated with a key from multiple trees;

Reviewer: I think you have to just use a lock/transaction across the index to do this?

Author: Yes, now that I think better about it something like that would work. It's somewhat the same as querying multiple trees and joining their results.

Author: Can you clarify what do you mean with that?

Reviewer: Say I had multiple indices over a KVv2 entry:

```json
{
 "value": "...",
 "author": "...",
 "security_level": "..."
}
```

and I call `DELETE /data/my_entry`, causing me to want to remove `my_entry` from all three indices above. I'd do:

```go
txn, err := req.Storage.BeginTransaction()
storage, err := bptree.NewStorage(ctx, txn)

for indexName, indexValue := range getIndicesInEntry("my-entry") {
  idx := b.idxMgr.GetIndex(ctx, storage, indexName)
  idx.Delete(ctx, storage, indexValue)
  // or
  idx.Delete(ctx, storage, "my-entry")
}

txn.Commit()
```

Author: Yes, the current implementation would work something like that but has its limitations. If operating with an "external" transaction, we don't know whether or not an operation was successful until is effectively committed. For that reason, I have decided to disable caching if operating on an logical.storage transaction. I'm working on some storage improvements, that will be pushing the PoC branch soon. Worth updating the spec?

Reviewer: @Gabrielopesantos Right, I had really wished the physical cache system allowed snapshotting, but alas. :(  What we ended up doing was creating a new (smaller) cache for the transaction, so at least inside the transaction you can take advantage of the benefits. 

Which cache library are you using? If you can get a soft-clone, that'd be ideal. Even if you discard the state afterwards, that'd be fine.

Author: > Which cache library are you using?

The one created in  `sdk/lru/lru.go`, its just a wrapper around `github.com/hashicorp/golang-lru/v2`.

> If you can get a soft-clone, that'd be ideal. Even if you discard the state afterwards, that'd be fine.

Yes, something like that should be feasible. Going to look into that.

> - Index rebuilding if any configuration is changed, such as order (currently not supported); Might be easier to simply rebuild the index from scratch.

Reviewer: I concur here.

> - Removal of an index;

Reviewer: I think the `ClearKeyView(...)` helper will be useful here (if I got the name correct from memory).

## Related Issues

OpenBao:
- https://github.com/orgs/openbao/discussions/1400

> GitHub:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vault:
```
